[[Exploring Multisensory Extended Reality Approaches for Autistic Children - Improve Well-Being and Assess Auditory Perception]]

>The four HCI waves correspond to various design research agendas which appeared over time and now co-exist. They went from assessing user experiences in terms of performance, to more subjective accounts. While all waves are detailed below, our work in this thesis mainly falls within the third and fourth waves. The first HCI wave is driven by an engineering perspective. Digital solutions are created to optimize existing processes (e.g., documentation), with testing focusing on performance metrics (e.g., task completion time). The second wave explores technology with respect to user actions and their underlying cognitive processes [128]. Users’ acceptability and usability are more valued, as well as how they communicate with computers. New measures appear to assess these features, for instance targeting the ease of learning. These two first HCI waves are sometimes criticized for reducing people’s experiences to facts, without considering their subjective experiences. Parallels can be drawn with criticisms made about the medical and social models, which reduced disability either to inner or external causes. To tackle this issue, the third wave, also called situated perspectives, focuses on user experience, in terms of meaning or emotions with respect to the users’ culture or embodiment [128]. Two approaches informed our work: positive technology [251] and probes [99]. Positive technology fosters well-being, by seeking to improve users’ quality of experience, adaptive behaviours, and positive functioning. To do so, it focuses on affective quality, engagement, and connectedness between users. Probes are open-ended playful digital resources encouraging exploration. They aim to get insights about the users’ quality of experience [99], by valuing uncertainty and subjective interpretations, to overcome ”researchers’ tendency to apply their own conceptual frameworks to the phenomena they observe” [99, p. 2]. Parallels could be drawn with developmental and sensory approaches above mentioned, since they both rely on play to gradually work on abilities. A fourth wave called “Entanglement HCI” has recently appeared. It tries to understand user interactions through a network of relationships between humans and non-humans (in particular digital technologies) [89]. This wave advocates for increasing users’ agency, i.e., their perceived ability to act.